---
title: MPL
layout: post
#commentIssueId: 8
---
In this post I'll explain MPL, the research language I'm working on in the Programming Language Lab at the University of Calgary. It's a concurrent language, which is a bit strange because none of us here have any major experience making concurrent software. Instead, MPL is derived largely from Category Theory.

As originally conceived, MPL is divided into two separate parts, a "concurrent" part ("processes") and a sequential part ("functions"). The sequential part is not very important--it's basically a pure functional language like Haskell--but it has an interesting concept so I'll talk about it briefly.

The original syntax of MPL is quite unusual. To make this document easier to follow I'll use a C-style syntax instead. I'll still call it MPL, because the "real" syntax is not stable, not important, and not well designed: it's the internal ideas that matter.

The key properties of MPL
-------------------------

MPL has two key properties:

1. Type-safe concurrency
2. Guaranteed termination

MPL programs consist of a set of "processes" that run concurrently. Conceptually, what we call _processes_ are threads. Much like Erlang, if MPL had a production-quality compiler it would surely support some kind of lightweight processes (e.g. [green threads](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Green_threads) with small stacks), because it would probably not be unusual for MPL programs to consist of hundreds or thousands of processes. Processes communicate with each other exclusively by passing messages; there is no concept of shared memory, so MPL would easily scale across multiple computers. However, if you happen to be passing large data structures between processes then shared memory could (as an implementation detail) improve performance. MPL "solves" the problem of shared mutable state by simply not having any mutable variables.

**Type-safe concurrency** means that when one process sends an integer, there is always another process that is ready (or will be ready in the future) to receive an integer. When one process sends a string, another is ready to receive a string. And so on. Communication between process is governed by special types called _protocols_. A protocol is a type that explains how communication works between a pair of processes. Here's a simple example of a protocol, which I'll call a "lookup" protocol:

  1. Put an integer.
  2. Get a string.
  3. Start over.

If one process is following the above protocol, another protocol must be following the complement (or negation) of the protocol:

  1. Get an integer.
  2. Put a string.
  3. Start over.

As an example, imagine an extremely simple "list service" process that contains a large list of strings. It follows the second protocol: it gets an integer (waiting if necessary), and when it gets one, it treats it as an index, looks up the string at that index in the big list, and sends the string back.

There's a couple of things missing though. First, the dictionary process needs to initialize when it starts, so a process can take zero or more so-called "sequential" parameters which must be provided to start the process. Some outside code might provide the list this way. Second, the dictionary process needs to know when it should shut down.

MPL has named protocol "constructors" or "selectors" which represent different "paths" through the protocol. One of the paths can tell one of the processes to shut down (the other process keeps running). For example:

  1. Choose either 
     A. Put an integer, get a string, and start over.
     B. Close the channel.

So the complement protocol, implemented by the "list service", is

  1. Receive choice (A) or (B)
     A. Get an integer, put a string, and start over
     B. Shut down the current process.




1. Either 
   (A) put an integer, then put a string, then get an integer, or
   (B) get a string, then get two integers.
2. Go to step 1.

The above protocol has a choice in it.



1. Either 
   (A) put an integer, then put a string, then get an integer, or
   (B) put a string, then get two integers
2. Go to step 1.

It should be noted that this concept already exists; it's called session types. I was given the impression that the first paper on session types was published at some point before I arrived, _after_ this lab started designing MPL. But 

As far as I can tell, Session types.  

The neat thing about MPL is that if you follow certain rules, Sequential code is always guaranteed to terminate (no infinite loops)
2. Concurrent code cannot have deadlocks or livelocks

Thus, the whole program always terminates.

The sequential part
-------------------

Roughly speaking, the sequential part of MPL is a simplified version of Haskell with a couple of extra features.

Firstly, something called `fold` ensures that the program terminates. Consider the following MPL pseudocode:

//